content/additional-documentation/safety.md, before:

---
author: "Marc Kruithof"
date: 2018-03-16
linktitle: Safety
title: Safety
highlight: true
weight: 1
keywords:
- safety
- reef-pi
- reef tank
- controller
- raspberry pi
- coral
---


### Why should I read this?
You are working with a project that is great stuff for your coral, fish or whatever you want to automate. YOU ARE WORKING WITH WATHER together with ELECTRICITY. Ok... If you want to fry yourself, it is your own responsibility. But please think of all the living things in your tank.

### Introduction
If you are working with electronics, especially with water and high voltage together, keep in mind that it might be dangerous. That is why this page is added. It is not high voltage that will kill you but high current will. And with high current I mean milliamps. If you don't know what I'm talking about, please read this whole page. If you think it will never happen to me, please read this whole page. If you know what I'm talking about, please read this whole page.
### Okey, now that I have your attention.
One of my favorite pages that makes sense is: https://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/~p616/safety/fatal_current.html And please read this.
If you did read this, you now know that with higher voltages you will die and adding water to your skin with lower voltage can kill. Keep in mind that salt pollutes the water (electrically) and even bring down the resistance. With the effect that even lower voltage can kill you. I have seen sites that are saying that even a 1.5V battery can kill you in the right circumstances, but I don't think that those circumstances will ever been reached. Never the less, keep in mind that you take care and your tank are safe.

## If you are not sure on this topic, please search the internet, consult the internet, ask friends who do know about electricity and safety, or just don't mess with it.

## Reef-pi or any contributor will never be responsible for any injury whatsoever for not thinking.

Commit message:

[feat] add fire and electrical safety disclaimer (#41)
* fix order

* add fire safety. Dont use kill word. Remove redundant direct statements

content/additional-documentation/safety.md, after:

---
author: "Marc Kruithof"
date: 2018-03-16
linktitle: Safety
title: Safety
highlight: true
weight: 4
keywords:
- safety
- reef-pi
- reef tank
- controller
- raspberry pi
- coral
---



A typical reef-pi build involves both **water** and **electricity**, this can be potentially hazerdous. Please ensure safety consideration for yourself and all the living things in your tank.
If you are working with electronics, especially with water and high voltage together, it can be dangerous. This page is intended to inform you about this risk. It is not high voltage but high current that imposes risk. High current here stands for milliamps.

Most of us aware that Higher voltages can be fatal. Salt pollutes the water (electrically) and brings down the resistance. This allows even lower voltage to be fatal. Take appropriate safety precautions.

Above all, your safety is your own responsibility, including proper use of equipment and safety gear, and determining whether you have adequate skill and experience. Power tools, electricity, and other resources used for reef-pi builds are dangerous, unless used properly and with adequate precautions, including safety gear. reef-pi project authors disclaims all responsibility for any resulting damage, injury, or expense. It is your responsibility to make sure that your activities comply with applicable laws, including copyright. Always check the webpage associated with each project before you get started. There may be important updates or corrections!

Last, but not the least, The United States Fire Administration (USFA) has a guide and many simple steps you can take to prevent the loss of life and property resulting from electrical fires.

## References

- [Fatal current article from Ohio state university](https://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/~p616/safety/fatal_current.html)
